at a time when india had a total of 250 computers ,  shiv nadar led a young team which passionately believed in the growth of the indigenous it industry .
 that vision in 1976 ,  born out of a delhi &lsquo;barsaati&rsquo; ,  has resulted three decades later in creating a us $ 3 .
5 billion global enterprise .
 hcl is today a leader in the it industry ,  employing 41 , 000 professionals and having a global presence in 16 countries spanning locations in the us ,  europe ,  japan ,  asean and the pacific rim .
 hcl&rsquo;s business today spans it hardware manufacturing and distribution ,  system integration ,  technology and software services ,  business process outsourcing ,  and infrastructure management .
 hcl enterprises is a leader in global technology and it services .
hcl&rsquo;s basic plan of developing an indigenous microcomputer bore fruit in 1978 at the same time as apple and three years before ibm .
 this was considered by many industry observers as the birth of the indian computer industry .
 under the able direction of its founding fathers it commenced global operations in the us in 1988 .
 shiv nadar&rsquo;s risk-taking ability is legendary and he has often made daring forays based on his conviction of the future .
 at a time when hardware was the name of the game ,  nadar foresaw the huge potential in the area of it education and learning from which niit was born .
 yet again when software development was still in the nascent stages ,  shiv nadar took the lead and today hcl is a force to reckon with in the global markets .
 the organisation structure of hcl enterprises consists of two listed companies in india &ndash; hcl technologies and hcl infosystems .
shiv nadar ,  chairman and ceo ,  attributes the success of the group to its management team and their entrepreneurial spirit ,  which together have enabled it to handle rapid changes in environments and technologies ,  and to transform threats into opportunities .
 fundamental to the process has been the development of new paradigms for the unprecedented situations into which the group ventures .
 these include guidelines for organisation restructuring ,  market creation ,  technology leveraging

and business up-scaling .
 like any other business enterprise profits are important for the survival and growth of hcl as an enterprise .
at hcl the management believes that a satisfied employee creates a satisfied customer ,  who in turn creates profits that lead to satisfied shareholders .
hcl has a strong sense of social responsibility .
 it has set up educational institutions in the fields of management ,  engineering and computer education ,  in which one-third of the students are girls .
accordingtoshivnadar , the future belongs to the globalenterprise which is able to transform itself according to the challenges of global economy .
source: www .
hcl .
in
the above case is an example of a successful organisation which is amongst the top companies in india .
 it has risen to the top because of its quality of management .
 management is required in all kinds of organisations whether they are manufacturing computers or hand-looms ,  trading in consumer goods or providing hairstyling services and even in non-business organisations .
 let us take another example .
suhasini is the branch manager of fabmart ,  an organisation that promotes the sales of indian handloom and handicraft products while providing equitable employment to traditional artisans .
 fabmart sources its products from over 7500 craft persons and artisans across india .
 planning the products is a difficult task that is done by a team of marketing and design experts to ensure that whatever is produced is according to market demand .
 these plans are then communicated by suhasini to the rural artisans who actually implement them .
fabmart is a private limited company with several branches all over the country .
 it has a complex organisation structure in which actual production is in the hands of several skilled artisans and marketing is done by staff at branches such as the one managed by suhasini .
 this means constantly providing direction and motivation to her employees .
 she also has to ensure that production is carried out according to plans in order to ensure regular sales .
a typical day in suhasini&rsquo;s life consists of a series of interrelated and continuous functions .
 she has to plan a special festive collection for diwali and christmas .
 this means organising more funds and recruiting more artisans .
 she also has to regularly communicate with her suppliers to ensure that deadlines regarding delivery of goods are met .
 in the course of the day she meets customers for a general feedback
nature and significance of management
and any suggestions that they may have .
suhasini is the manager of fabmart .
 so is nusli wadia of bombay dyeing ,  bill gates of microsoft ,  shiv nadar of hcl enterprises ,  indra nooyi of pepsico and the principal of your school .
 they all manage organisations .
 schools ,  hospitals ,  shops and large corporations are all organisations with diverse goals that are aimed at achieving something .
 no matter what the organisation is or what its goals might be ,  they all have something in common &ndash; management and managers .
you have observed that suhasini&rsquo;s work as a manager consists of a series of different activities or functions aimed at achieving the goals of the organisation .
 these interconnected and interdependent functions are part of management .
 successful organisations do not achieve their goals by chance but by following a deliberate process called &lsquo;management&rsquo; .
management is essential for all organisations big or small ,  profit or non-profit ,  services or manufacturing .
 management is necessary so that individuals make their best contribution towards group objectives .
management consists of a series of interrelated functions that are performed by all managers .
 shiv nadar ,  the ceo of hcl enterprises performs all these functions and so does suhasini at fabmart .
 later in this chapter you will understand that although both of them are managers ,  they function at different levels in the organisation .
 the time spent by managers in different functions however is different .
 managers at the top level spend more time in planning and organising than managers at lower levels of the organisation .
management is a very popular term and has been used extensively for all types of activities and mainly for taking charge of different activities in
&ldquo;management is the process of designing and maintaining an environment in which individuals ,  working together in groups ,  efficiently accomplish selected aims .
&rdquo; harold koontz and heinz weihrich
&ldquo;management is defined as t he process of planning ,  organising ,  actuating and controlling an organisation&rsquo;s operations in order to achieve coordination of the human and material resources essential in the effective and efficient attainment of objectives .
&rdquo;
robert l .
 trewelly and m .
 gene newport &ldquo;management is the process of working with and through others to effectively achieve organisational objectives by efficiently using limited resources in the changing environment .
&rdquo; kreitner

any enterprise .
 as you have seen from the above example and case study that management is an activity which is necessary wherever there is a group of people working in an organisation .
 people in organisations are performing diverse tasks but they are all working towards the same goal .
 management aims at guiding their efforts towards achieving a common objective &mdash; a goal .
 thus ,  management has to see that tasks are completed and goals are achieved (i .
e .
 ,  effectiveness) with the least amount of resources at a minimum cost (i .
e .
 ,  efficiency) .
management ,  has therefore ,  been defined as a process of getting things done with the aim of achieving goals effectively and efficiently .
 we need to analyse this definition .
 there are certain terms which require elaboration .
 these are (a) process ,  (b) effectively ,  and (c) efficiently .
process in the definition means the primary functions or activities that management performs to get things done .
 these functions are planning ,  organising ,  staffing ,  directing and controlling which we will discuss later in the chapter and the book .
being effective or doing work effectively basically means finishing the given task .
 effectiveness in management is concerned with doing the right task ,  completing activities and achieving goals .
 in other words ,  it is concerned with the end result .
but it is not enough to just complete the tasks .
 there is another aspect
business studies
also ,  i .
e .
 ,  being efficient or as we say doing work efficiently .
efficiency means doing the task correctly and with minimum cost .
 there is a kind of cost-benefit analysis involved and the relationship between inputs and outputs .
 if by using less resources (i .
e .
 ,  the inputs) more benefits are derived (i .
e .
 ,  the outputs) then efficiency has increased .
 efficiency is also increased when for the same benefit or outputs ,  fewer resources are used and less costs are incurred .
 input resources are money ,  materials ,  equipment and persons required to do a particular task .
 obviously ,  management is concerned with the efficient use of these resources ,  because they reduce costs and ultimately lead to higher profits .
these two terms are different but they are interrelated .
 for management ,  it is important to be both effective and efficient .
 effectiveness and efficiency are two sides of the same coin .
 but these two aspects need to be balanced and management at times ,  has to compromise with efficiency .
 for example ,  it is easier to be effective and ignore efficiency i .
e .
 ,  complete the given task but at a high cost .
 suppose ,  a company&rsquo;s target production is 5000 units in a year .
 to achieve this target the manager has to operate on double shifts due to power
nature and significance of management
failure most of the time .
 the manager is able to produce 5000 units but at a higher production cost .
 in this case ,  the manager was effective but not so efficient ,  since for the same output ,  more inputs (labour cost ,  electricity costs) were used .
at times ,  a business may concentrate more on producing goods with fewer resources i .
e .
 ,  cutting down cost but not achieving the target production .
 consequently ,  the goods do not reach the market and hence the demand for them declines and competitors enter the market .
 this is a case of being efficient but not effective since the goods did not reach the market .
therefore ,  it is important for management to achieve goals (effectiveness) with minimum resources i .
e .
 ,  as efficiently as possible while maintaining a balance between effectiveness and efficiency .
 usually high efficiency is associated with high effectiveness which is the aim of all managers .
 but undue emphasis on high efficiency without being effective is also not desirable .
 poor management is due to both inefficiency and ineffectiveness .
after going through some of the definitions we find some elements that may be called the basic characteristics of management:
management is a goal-oriented process:
(iii)
(a)

jack welch was appointed ceo of ge in 1981 .
 at that time the firm had a marke
&bull;
get people so passionate about what they are doing that they cannot wait to execute this plan .
 have great energy ,  competitive spirit and the ability to spark excitement and achieve results .
 search for leaders who have the same qualities .
source: www .
ge .
co .
in
store a customer&rsquo;s need is satisfied and in a hospital a patient is treated .
 management translates this work in terms of goals to be achieved and assigns the means to achieve it .
 this is done in terms of problems to be solved ,  decisions to be made ,  plans to be established ,  budgets to be prepared ,  responsibilities to be assigned and authority to be delegated .
it implies dealing with employees as individuals with diverse needs and behavior;
it also means dealing with individuals as a group of people .
nature and significance of management
the task of management is to make people work towards achieving the organisation&rsquo;s goals ,  by making their strengths effective and their weaknesses irrelevant .
(c
(iv)
together everyone achieves more as a team

exhibition and on another day she may spend time in sorting out an employee&rsquo;s problem .
 the task of a manager consists of an ongoing series of functions .
(v)
management &ndash;
business studies
gement should enable all its members to grow and develop as needs and opportunities change .
(vi)
nature and significance of management
giant made major changes in its menu to be able to survive in the indian market .
(vii)
o
management seeks to achieve certain objectives which are the desired result of any activity .
 they mustbederivedfromthebasicpurpose of the business .
 in any organisation there are different objectives and management has to achieve all objectives in an effective and efficient manner .
 objectives can be classified into organisational objectives ,  social objectives and personal or individual objectives .
(i)

and material resources to the maximum possible advantage ,  i .
e .
 ,  to fulfill the economic objectives of a business .
 these are survival ,  profit and growth .
(ii)
business studies
business or non-business ,  has a social obligation to fulfill .
 this refers to consistently creating economic value for various constituents of society .
 this includes using environmental friendly methods of production ,  giving employment opportunities to the disadvantaged sections of society and providing basic amenities like schools and cr&egrave;ches to employees .
 the box given below illustrates how a company can fulfill its social responsibility .
(iii)
a quiet digital revolution is reshaping the lives of farmers in remote indian villages .
 in these villages ,  farmers grow soyabeans ,  wheat and coffee in small plots of land ,  as they have done for thousands of years .
 a typical village has no reliable electricity and has antiquated telephone lines .
 the farmers are largely illiterate and have never seen a computer .
 but farmers in these villages are conducting e-business through an initiative called e-choupal ,  created by itc ,  one of india&rsquo;s largest consumer product and agribusiness companies .
itc&rsquo;s e-chaupal initiative is a fine example of a business organisation fulfilling corporate social responsibility .
 the basic aim of the programme is to provide farmers in rural india with the opportunity to make use of a direct marketing channel eliminating multiple intermediation and wasteful handling and unnecessary transaction costs .
 it is the single-largest information technology-based intervention by a corporate entity in rural india ,  transforming the indian farmer into a progressive knowledge-seeking citizen ,  enriching him with knowledge and elevating him to a new order of empowerment .
e-choupal delivers real-time information and customised knowledge to improve the farmer&rsquo;s decision-making ability ,  thereby better aligning farm output to market demands; securing better quality ,  productivity and improved price discovery .
 given the low levels of literacy in the rural sector ,  the role of the choupal sanchalak ,  the lead farmer of the village ,  in facilitating physical interface between the computer terminal and the farmers is central to the project .
 e-choupal smart cards enable farmer identification to provide customised information on the e-choupal website .
 online transactions are captured to reward farmers for volume and value of usage .
the e-chaupal initiative has found its way into the harvard business school as a leading case study illustarating the use of modern technology by a leading business house for the benefit of the rural poor .
source: mohanbir sawhney ,  mccormick tribune professor of technology ,  kellogg school of management ,  usa .
nature and significance of management
of the organisation to satisfy their diverse needs .
 these vary from financial needs such as competitive salaries and perks ,  social needs such as peer recognition and higher level needs such as personal growth and development .
 management has to reconcile personal goals with organisational objectives for harmony in the organisation .
having understood that management is a universal activity that is integral to any organisation we now examine some of the reasons that have made management so important:
(iii)
management is as old as civilisation .
 although modern organisations are
1
of recent origin ,  organised activity has existed since the time of the ancient civilisations .
 in fact ,  organisations may be considered the distinguishing feature that separated civilised society from uncivilised ones .
 the earliest management practices were a set of rules and regulations that grew out of the experiences of governmental and commercial activities .
 the development of trade and commerce gradually led to the development of management principles and practices .
the term &lsquo;management&rsquo; today has several different connotations that highlight the different aspects of its nature .
 the study of management has evolved over a period of time along with the modern organisations; based both on the experience and practice of managers and a set of theoretical relationships .
 over a period of time ,  it has grown into a dynamic subject with its own special characteristics .
 however ,  one question that needs to be addressed pertaining to the nature of management is whether it is a science or an art or both ?
 in order to answer this let us examine the features of both science and art to see how far management fulfills them .
what is art ?
 art is the skillful and personal application of existing knowledge to achieve desired results .
 it can be acquired through study ,  observation and experience .
 since
business studies
art is concerned with personal application of knowledge some kind of ingenuity and creativity is required to practice the basic principles learnt .
 the basic features of an art are as follows:
(iii)
management can be said to be an art since it satisfies the following criteria:
(i) a 	successful manager practices the art of management in the
nature and significance of management
day-to-day job of managing an enterprise based on study ,  observationandexperience .
there is a lot of literature available in various areas of management like marketing ,  finance and human resources which the manager has to specialise in .
 there is existence of theoretical knowledge .
(ii) there 	are various theories of management ,  as propounded by many management thinkers ,  which prescribe certain universal principles .
 a manager applies these scientific methods and body of knowledge to a given situation ,  an issue or a problem ,  in his own unique manner .
 a good manager works through a combination of practice ,  creativity ,  imagination ,  initiative and innovation .
 a manager achieves perfection after long practice .
 students of management also apply these principles differently depending on how creative they are .
(iii) a manager applies this acquired knowledge in a personalised and skillful manner in the light of the realities of a given situation .
 he is involved in the activities of the organisation ,  studies critical situations and formulates his own theories for use in a given situation .
 this gives rise to different styles of management
the best managers are committed and dedicated individuals; highly trained and educated ,  with personal
1
qualities such as ambition ,  selfmotivation , creativityandimagination ,  a desire for development of the self and the organisation they belong to .
 all management practices are based on the same set of principles; what distinguishes a successful manager from a less successful one is the ability to put these principles into practice .
science is a systematised body of knowledge that explains certain general truths or the operation of general laws .
 the basic features of science are as follows:
systematised body of knowledge:
(iii)
based on the above features ,  we can say that management has some characteristics of science .
(i) management has a systematised body of knowledge .
 it has its
1
anthropology
source:
nature and significance of management
own theory and principles that have developed over a period of time ,  but it also draws on other disciplines such as economics , sociology , psychology and mathematics .
 like all other organised activity ,  management has its own vocabulary of terms and concepts .
 for example ,  all of us discuss sports like cricket and soccer using a common vocabulary .
 the players also use these terms to communicate with each other .
 similarly managers need to communicate with one another with the help of a common vocabulary for a better understanding of their work situation .
(ii) th
(iii) since 	the principles of management are not as exact as the principles of science ,  their application and use is not universal .
 they have to be modified according to a given situation .
 however ,  they provide managers with certain standardised techniques that can be used in different situations .
 these principles are also used for training and development of managers .
you must have understood from the foregoing discussion that management has features of both art and science .
 the practice of management is an art .
 however ,  managers can work better if their practice is based on the principles of management .
 these principles constitute the science of management .
 management as an art and a science are therefore not mutually exclusive ,  but complement each other .
you have understood so far that all forms of organised activity need to be managed .
 you would also have observed that organisations look for individuals with specific qualifications and experience to manage them .
 it has also been observed that there has been an increase in the corporate form of business on the one hand and
1
increasing emphasis on managed business concerns .
 does this imply that management is a profession ?
 to answer this question let us examine the salient features of a profession and see whether management satisfies them .
a profession has the following characteristics:
(iii)
(iv)
business studies
oath of ethical practice at the time they enter the profession .
(v)
management does not meet the exact criteria of a profession .
 however ,  it does have some of the features of a profession:
nature and significance of management
unlike professions such as medicine or law which require a practicing doctor or lawyer to possess valid degrees ,  nowhere in the world is it mandatory for a manager to possess any such specific degree .
 but professional knowledge and training is considered to be a desirable qualification ,  since there is greater demand for those who possess degrees or diplomas from reputed institutions .
 therefore ,  as such the second criterion has not been strictly met .
(iii) there 	are several associations of practising managers in india ,  like the aima (all india management association) that has laid down a code of conduct to regulate the activities of their members .
 there is ,  however ,  no compulsion for managers to be members of such an association nor does it have any statutory backing .
(iv) the basic purpose of management is to help the organisation achieve its stated goal .
 this may be profit maximisation for a business enterprise and service for a hospital .
 however ,  profit maximisation as the objective of management does not hold true and is fast changing .
 therefore ,  if an organisation has a good management team that is efficient and effective it automatically serves society by providing good quality products at reasonable prices .
l
shiv nadar and suhasini are both managers of an enterprise .
 shiv nadar is the ceo of hcl and suhasini is a branch manager at fabmart .
 they manage their enterprise at different levels .
 management is a universal term used for certain functions performed by individuals in an enterprise who are bound together in a hierarchy of relationships .
 every individual in the hierarchy is responsible for successful completion of a particular task .
 to be able to fulfill that responsibility he is assigned a certain amount of authority or the right to take a decision .
 this authority-responsibility relationship binds individuals as superiors and subordinates and gives rise to different levels in an organisation .
 generally speaking there are three levels in the hierarchy of an organisation .
(i)
1
according to the overall objectives of the organisation .
 these top level managers are responsible for the welfare and survival of the organisation .
 they analyse the business environment and its implications for the survival of the firm .
 they formulate overall organisational goals and strategies for their achievement .
 they are responsible for all the activities of the business and for its impact on society .
 the job of the top manager is complex and stressful ,  demanding long hours and commitment to the organisation .
(ii)
business studies
managers .
 they are subordinate to top managers and superior to the first line managers .
 they are usually known as division heads ,  operations manager or plant superintendent .
 middle management is responsible for implementing and controlling plans and strategies developed by top management .
 at the same time they are responsible for all the activities of first line managers .
 their main task is to carry out the plans formulated bythetopmanagers .
forthisthey need to: (i) interpret the policies framed by top management , 
(ii) ensure that their department has the necessary personnel , 
&ldquo;you don&rsquo;t learn management from books alone .
 .
 .
&rdquo;
nature and significance of management
(iii) assign necessary duties and responsibilities to them , 
(iv)motivatethemtoachievedesired objectives ,  and (v) co-operate with other departments for smooth functioning of the organisation .
 at the same time they are responsible for all the activities of first line managers .
(iii)
1
is limited according to the plans drawn by the top management .
 supervisory management plays a very important role in the organisation since they interact with the actual work force and pass on instructions of the middle management to the workers .
 through their efforts quality of output is maintained ,  wastage of materials is minimised and safety standards are maintained .
 the quality of workmanship and the quantity of output depends on the hard work ,  discipline and loyalty of the workers .
managerial levels
0
management is described as the process of planning ,  organising ,  directing and controlling the efforts of organisational members and of using organisational resources to achieve specific goals .
business studies
required .
 it decides who will do a particular task ,  where it will be done ,  and when it will be done .
 organising involves the grouping of the required tasks into manageable departments or work units and the establishment of authority and reporting relationships within the organisational hierarchy .
 proper organisational techniques help in the accomplishment of work and promote both the efficiency of operations and the effectiveness of results .
 different kinds of business require different structures according to the nature of work .
 you will read more about this in a later chapter .
directing
nature and significance of management
components of direction .
 motivating workers means simply creating an environment that makes them want to work .
 leadership is influencing others to do what the leader wants them to do .
 a good manager directs through praise and criticism in such a way that it brings out the best in the employee .
 suhasini&rsquo;s design team developed some prints for bedcovers in bright colours on silk .
 although they looked very impressive ,  the use of silk made the product too expensive for the average customer .
 praising their effort ,  suhasini suggested that they keep the silk bedcovers for special occasions like diwali and christmas and offer the cotton bedcovers on a regular basis .
1
change the fabric to keep costs in check .
the various functions of a manager are usually discussed in the order given above ,  suggesting that a manager first plans ,  then organises ,  puts staff in position ,  then directs ,  and finally controls .
 in reality ,  managers are rarely able to carry out these functions in isolation .
 the activities of a manager are interrelated and it is often difficult to pinpoint where one ended and the other began .
c
you have understood by now that a manager has to perform five interrelated functions in the process of managing an organisation which is a system made up of different interlinked and interdependent subsystems .
 a manager has to link these diverse groups towards the achievement of a common goal .
 the process by which a manager synchronises the activities of different departments is known as coordination .
coordination is the force that binds all the other functions of management .
 it is the common thread that runs through all activities such as purchase ,  production ,  sales ,  and finance to ensure continuity in the working of the organisation .
 coordination is sometimes considered a separate function of management .
 it is however ,  the

essence of management ,  for achieving harmony among individual efforts towards the accomplishment of group goals .
 each managerial function is an exercise contributing individually to coordination .
 coordination is implicit and inherent in all functions of an organisation .
the process of coordinating the activities of an organisation begins at the planning stage itself .
 top management plans for the entire organisation .
 according to these plans the organisational structure
business studies
is developed and staffed .
 in order to ensure that these plans are executed according to plans directing is required .
 any discrepancies between actual and realised activities are then taken care of at the stage of controlling .
 it is through the process of coordination that a manager ensures the orderly arrangement of individual and group efforts to ensure unity of action in the realisation of common objectives .
 coordination therefore involves synchronisation of the different actions or efforts of
nature and significance of management
coordination is balancing and keeping together the team by ensuring suitable allocation of tasks to the various members and seeing that the tasks are performed with harmony among the members themselves .
coordination is the process whereby an executive develops an orderly pattern of group efforts among his subordinates and secures unity of action in the pursuit of common purpose .
coordination is the orderly synchronising of efforts of subordinates to provide proper amount ,  timing and quality of execution so that their united efforts lead to the stated objectives ,  namely ,  the common purpose of the enterprise .
the various units of an organisation .
 this provides the requisite amount ,  quality ,  timing and sequence of efforts which ensures that planned objectives are achieved with a minimum of conflict .
the definitions given above highlight the following features of coordination:
fabmart ,  the production and sales department have to coordinate their work ,  so that production takes place according to the demand in the market .
(iii)
(iv)

the purchase ,  production and sales departmental efforts have to be coordinated by suhasini for achieving organisational objectives harmoniously .
 the purchase department is responsible for procuring fabric .
 this then becomes the basis of the activities of the production department and finally sales can take place .
 if fabric purchased is of an inferior quality or is not according to the specifications of the production department ,  further sales will also decline .
 in the absence of coordination there is overlapping and chaos instead of harmony and integration of activities .
(v)
the dabbawallas of mumbai is the story of a six sigma business enterprise .
 the success of the business lies in the complex yet well coordinated exercise that is carried out on the streets of mumbai day after day .
 what is the secret behind the efficiency with which their business is conducted ?
the story of the dabbawallas begins in the kitchens of mumbai .
 after they step out of their door ,  someone begins the time-consuming process of preparing the worker a fresh ,  home-cooked lunch .
 what happens next for demonstrates the coordination of the dabbawallas system .
 the first dabbawalla picks up the tiffin from home and takes it to the nearest railway station .
the second dabbawalla sorts out the dabbas at the railway station according to destination and puts them in the luggage carriage .
 the third one travels with the dabbas to the railway stations nearest to the destinations .
 the fourth one picks up dabbas from the railway station and drops them off at the offices .
by mid-morning ,  thousands of dabbawallas are bicycling through the streets of mumbai ,  ensuring a hot home cooked lunch for their customers .
 the whole tiffin distribution requires negligible technology .
 the dabbawallas rely on low capital and use cycles ,  wooden carriages and local trains to achieve their target .
there are several groups that work independently and network with each other to achieve their goal .
each area is divided into several small distribution sectors and each sector is handled by a particular person .
 this person understands the address in that locality very well .
 also ,  this perfection comes with practice .
 many new employees work for months under the guidance of their seniors .
punctuality and time management are on top of the agenda for dabbawallas .
 whatever be the circumstances ,  the dabbawallas never get delayed even by a few minutes .
nature and significance of management
coordinates the activities of its workers to ensure that work proceeds according to plans .
(vi)
coordination ,  therefore ,  is not a separate function of management ,  but its very essence .
 for an organisation to effectively and
5
efficiently achieve its objectives coordination is required .
 like a thread in a garland ,  coordination is a part of all management functions .
even as you read this chapter ,  the organisation and its management are changing .
 as boundaries between cultures and nations get blurred and new communication technology makes it possible to think of the world as a &lsquo;global village&rsquo; ,  the scope of international and intercultural relationships is rapidly expanding .
 the modern organisation is a global organisation that has to be managed in a global perspective .
 what does this imply ?
rajat lal is the director of a firm that develops software solutions for the travel industry on a global level .
 he represents a us software services firm that outsources project work to its delivery partners in gurgaon ,  the software hub of north india .
 it develops software for companies in the technology ,  transportation and leisure sectors ,  across the world .
 rajat is the interface between his global clients and his domestic technical team .
 that makes his job more challenging than that of a manager who functions in a totally domestic environment .
 this is what rajat has to say about the challenges of his job:

science
profession
planning
organising
staffing
directing
controlling
coordination
nature and significance of management
management is the process of planning ,  organising ,  staffing ,  directing and controlling the enterprise resources efficiently and effectively for achieving the goals of the organisation .
 effectiveness in management is concerned with doing the right task ,  completing activities and achieving goals .
 efficiency means doing the task correctly and with minimum cost .
the key features of management are: (i) goal oriented process
objectives
management fulfills three basic objectives: organisational ,  social and personal .
importance
management is important because it helps in achieving group goals ,  increases efficiency ,  creates a dynamic organisation ,  helps achieve personal objectives and contributes to the development of society .
management is a combination of an organised body of knowledge (science) and its skillful application (art) .
 although it does not satisfy all the requirements of a profession ,  it is to a large extent professional in character .
management is considered a three-tier activity .
 the top management focuses on determination of objectives and policies ,  middle management attempts to achieve these objectives through the effort of other managers and supervisory or operational management directly oversees the efforts of the workforce .
all managers perform the following interrelated functions: planning ,  organising ,  staffing ,  directing and controlling .
coordination is the essence of management .
 it is the process of achieving unity of action among interdependent activities and departments of an organisation .
1 .
 define management


 .
 	why is management considered a multi-faceted concept ?
5 .
 discuss the basic features of management as a profession .
long answer type
1 .
 management is considered to be both an art and science .
 explain .
  .
 do you think management has the characteristics of a full fledged profession ?
  .
 coordination is the essence of management .
 do you agree ?
 give reasons .
 .
 	&ldquo;a successful enterprise has to achieve its goals effectively and efficiently .
&rdquo; explain .
5 .
 management is a series of continuous interrelated functions .
 comment .
1 .
 which is not a function of management of the following
planning
staffing
cooperating
controlling 
an art
a science
earning profits
top level managers
all of the above
5 .
 coordination is
(a) function of management
nature and significance of management
case problems
activity 1
1 .
company x is facing a lot of problems these days .
 it manufactures white goods like washing machines ,  microwave ovens ,  refrigerators and air conditioners .
 the company&rsquo;s margins are under pressure and the profits and market share are declining .
 the production department blames marketing for not meeting sales targets and marketing blames production department for producing goods ,  which are not of good quality meeting customers expectations .
 the finance department blames both production and marketing for declining return on investment and bad marketing .
what quality of management do you think the company is lacking ?
 explain briefly .
 what steps should the company management take to bring the company back on track ?
 .
a company wants to modify its existing product in the market due to decreasing sales .
 you can imagine any product about which you are familiar .
 what decisions/steps should each level of management take to give effect to this decision ?
 .
a firm plans in advance and has a sound organisation structure with efficient supervisory staff and control system .
 on several occasion it finds that plans are not being adhered to .
 it leads to confusion and duplication of work .
 advise remedy .
these activities are meant to reinforce concepts and to make the
learning joyful .
 they also aim to give pupils simulated experiences of
the managerial activities relevant to their level of understanding .
make groups of 5 &ndash;  students each according to the size of class .
 let them run a garment manufacturing company .
 assign the following tasks to each group .
(i)let group &lsquo;a&rsquo; identify the activities that take place in the company .
 (ii)let group &lsquo;b&rsquo; classify these activities into managerial and non-managerial activities .
0
(iii)let group &lsquo;c&rsquo; identify the planning activities .
 (iv)let group &lsquo;d&rsquo; identify the organising activities .
 (v)let group &lsquo;e&rsquo; identify the staffing activities .
 (vi)let group &lsquo;f&rsquo; identify the directing activities .
 (vii)let group &lsquo;g&rsquo; identify the controlling activities .
 (viii)let group &lsquo;h&rsquo; identify the coordinating activities .
 the teacher can then summarise these activities and derive appropriate conclusions .
 the above activity can be done for any sector such as software export house ,  or an auto company .
 the teacher should do some preparation in finding out the actual activities with the help of internet and printed material relevant to the sector which is selected .
 the students can also be involved in the searching exercise by the teacher .
this activity involves classifying the activities identified in activity 1 into those taking place at higher management level ,  middle management level and lower management level .
 accordingly  groups a ,  b and c can be formed for the three levels .
 if the teacher so desires she/he can form more groups .
 then the findings of the groups can be summarised by the teacher .
note:
2
